Subject: Math: Algebra I + II (high school)
Date: 2026-07-05
Id: 207600
Student: no
City: Somerville, MA

How do negative exponents work?

---

I will assume that we are clear how to interpret whole number exponents using the *repeated multiplication* model. For example,

\[3^4 = 3 \cdot 3 \cdot 3 \cdot 3 = 81.\]

Also, let's make sure that we're clear on some vocabulary. In the example above, $3$ is called the **base**, $4$ is called the **exponent**, and $81$ is called the **power**.

\[\text{base}^\text{exponent} = \text{power}\]

The *repeated multiplication* model of exponentiation used above only helps us with whole number exponents. We get stuck when we try to compute something like $3^{-2}$. Let's first take a look at some values we do know for sure.

\[
\begin{align*}
   &\underline{\text{base}^\text{exponent}} &&\phantom{=\ } \underline{\text{power}} \\
   &3^4 &&= 81\\
   &3^3 &&= 27\\
   &3^2 &&= 9 \\
   &3^1 &&= 3
\end{align*}
\]

What pattern do you notice about the sequence of powers $81, 27, 9, 3$ that we have written down? *Whenever we decrease the exponent by 1, the power is divided by 3.*

Continuing this pattern allows us to reasonably extend our computational abilities into the negative exponent. Each row is computed as $\frac{1}{3}$ of the previous row.

\[
\begin{align*}
   &\underline{\text{base}^\text{exponent}} &&\phantom{=\ } \underline{\text{power}} \\
   &3^4 &&= 81 \\
   &3^3 &&= 27\\
   &3^2 &&= 9\\
   &3^1 &&= 3\\
   &3^0 &&= {\color{red} 1}\\
   &3^{-1} &&= {\color{red} \tfrac{1}{3}}\\
   &3^{-2} &&= {\color{red} \tfrac{1}{9}}\\
   &3^{-3} &&= {\color{red} \tfrac{1}{27}}\\
   &3^{-4} &&= {\color{red} \tfrac{1}{81}}\\
\end{align*}
\]

Notice that $3^{-1} = \frac{1}{3}$ is the reciprocal of $3^1 = 3$, $3^{-2} = \frac{1}{9}$ is the reciprocal of $3^2 = 9$, etc. This allows us to write a general rule for how to evaluate negative exponents.

\[\text{base}^{-\text{exponent}} = \frac{1}{\text{base}^{\text{exponent}}}\]

This rule says that a base raised to a negative exponent is the reciprocal of the same base raised to the positive version (technically, additive inverse) of that same exponent. Written in symbols, a more standard mathematical style, we can also write our general rule in the following way.

\[\boxed{x^{-n} = \frac{1}{x^n} }\]

This only works when you're not forced to divide by zero, so we are assuming $\text{base} = x \neq 0$.

## Important Notes:

- Despite the exponents being negative, the powers themselves are positive whenever the base is positive. For example, $3^{-2} = \frac{1}{9}$, which is still positive. (It's a common mistake for students to erroneously think that $3^{-2}$ should be negative.) In fact (when dealing with real numbers), we can write the following general rule. \[\boxed{\text{positive}^{\text{anything}} = \text{positive}}\]

- For any base, if the exponent is $0$, the value of the power will be $1$. \[\boxed{\text{anything}^0 = 1} \]
